---
tags: [aws, database, cloud, devops]
date: 2020-11-30
---

# Amazon DynamoDB - All You Need To Know About This AWS Service

DynamoDB is a NoSQL database that delivers single-digit millisecond performance
at scale.

> "DynamoDB can manage upward of 10 trillion requests daily and can support
> thresholds of more than 20 million requests per second" - AWS

Having been using it for while, in this article, I'm going to summarize
essential knowledge about Amazon DynamoDB that helps you: _Quickly understand
and know its use cases_ -> _Get started using it_ -> _Know what to consider for
best utilization_.

It's a 10-minute read, but after reading it, you'll know how DynamoDB works,
when you should use it, and how to best utilize it when it's necessary.

---

# Quickly Understand

First of all, it's Amazon DynamoDB, not AWS DynamoDB. _(People understand it
either way, it's respectful to call a thing correctly though)_

## What is DynamoDB?

Basically, DynamoDB is a database where you write and read your application
data. Application data is the core information of your application like user
profiles, user activities, transactions, etc. These data change very frequently
and grow enormously large as your application grows. Using a database like
DynamoDB, you don't need to work with physical disks, you simply ask the
database to write and read data for you, it will make sure things work correctly
under the hood.

Technically, DynamoDB is a **fully-managed**, **NoSQL**, **key-value** and
**document-based** database.

- **Fully-managed**: AWS _fully manages_ it for you. DynamoDB scales seamlessly,
  you don't maintain any server. AWS takes full responsibility for running,
  managing servers, software updates, backing up, cluster scaling, and all other
  ops. You use it by calling its APIs, just like how you'd use Stripe.

- **NoSQL**, **key-value**: DynamoDB has neither relationship nor schema, which
  means that you don't have to define what columns or fields an entry of data
  has. DynamoDB consists of _tables_. Each table consists of _items_. Each item
  has _a uniquely identifiable key_ and _other non-constraint attributes_. Each
  attribute is a _pair of key and value_. A key is a string. A value can be
  null, string, number, boolean, binary, list, or nested object. Except for the
  unique key, items can have different attributes from each other.

  ```json
  // How data in DynamoDB is conceptually structured 👇🏻

  "Table X": [
    {
       "key": "unique-key-1",
       "a": "some-value",
       "b": 1
    },
    {
       "key": "unique-key-2",
       "c": false,
       "d": {
          "it": "can have nested JSON",
          "too": null
       }
    },

    // other entries
  ]

  "Table Y": [
    // ...
  ]
  ```

  - **Document-based**: Each entry of data in DynamoDB is a JSON document,
    a.k.a. JSON object. Every operation happens at the document level, which
    means that an operation is either a document is retrieved, or a document is
    created, or a document is replaced, or a document is deleted. There's no
    operation at attribute level.

## Pricing model

DynamoDB offers 2 pricing models:

- **Pay per request**: you pay for the number of writes and reads you requested.
  DynamoDB automatically scales to accommodate traffic from your application. It
  costs _$1.25 per million write_ request units and _$0.25 per million read_
  request units (in Ohio region). This model is a good choice if you can't
  predict how much traffic your application will receive and don't prioritize
  cost optimization yet.

- **Provisioned**: you specify and pay for a specified number of read units and
  write units _per hour_. DynamoDB will be always ready to handle traffic at the
  provisioned capacity, regardless of how much traffic your application is
  actually receiving. This helps you set a predictable cost and performance for
  your application. It's useful when you've already known the pattern. You can
  change provisioned units every 24 hours.

Additionally, when your application is growing steadily, you can buy _reserved
units_, which can save over half the price if you pay upfront for a year.

## Use cases

> DynamoDB works best when you're searching for simplicity and scalability.

Because of its serverless trait, DynamoDB helps you have (theoretically)
infinitely scalable database infrastructure from day one with zero ops overhead
in the future. When your application data grow to terabytes or petabytes, your
database infrastructure stays the same, you simply provision and buy more
capacity. This can be an advantage to keep your technical team lean.

However, DynamoDB query ability is quite limited compared to most other database
services, which makes it difficult and inefficient to query complex models and
relationships.

In my experience, DynamoDB is a great choice for microservices, where each
service has 2-4 models, and their relationships can be detached and implemented
in a NoSQL design.

Netflix uses DynamoDB to build its A/B testing service that serves 125+ million
users, while FanFight reported saving 50% of cost and achieving 4x revenue by
migrating to DynamoDB.

---

# Get Started Using It

Now, let's explore some essential concepts to get started using it.

## Partitions

DynamoDB slices your table up into smaller chunks of data called _partitions_,
in order to speed up reads.

Each table must have a partition key, which DynamoDB uses to decide which
partition to put an item into.

A partition is also logical isolation of a DynamoDB query. A DynamoDB query can
only query data in a partition. If you need to query data in 2 different
partitions, you'll need 2 queries or a full table scan.

## Primary key

A primary key is a way to uniquely identify an item in a table, it is the only
attribute that you'll need to define before creating a DynamoDB table and
starting to use it.

There're 2 types of a primary key in DynamoDB:

- **Single primary key**: the partition key - a single and always-unique
  attribute, which is usually an ID, e.g. user ID, post ID, etc.

- **Composite primary key**: the partition key and a sort key. The first key is
  used for partitioning, the second key is used to sort items in the same
  partition. The combined value of these two keys has to be unique across a
  table.

## 5 types of read

In DynamoDB, there are 5 types of a read operation:

- `GetItem`: read a single item by specifying its primary key.

- `BatchGetItems`: send a request that groups up to 100 `GetItem` requests
  together. Each request is executed separately and in parallel. It is possible
  that some reads succeed whereas others fail.

- `TransactGetItems`: all-or-nothing `BatchGetItems`. All operations must either
  succeed or fail together. This costs twice as much as `BatchGetItems`.

- `Query`: read multiple items in the same partition. You must specify the
  partition key, and optionally a filter condition on the sort key.

- `Scan`: read **all items** in a table.

## Read consistency

DynamoDB has 2 types of read consistency, which can be useful for different
applications:

- **Eventually read consistency**: you get your data the fastest, but not always
  the latest. You'll usually receive the data 1 second ago.

- **Strongly read consistency**: you always get the latest data, but the latency
  may be higher and the reading cost is double.

## Secondary indexes

Every read operation except for a `Scan` must start with the partition key, to
query on other attributes without scanning through the whole table, you'll need
another tool - a secondary index.

A secondary index is essentially an (automatic) copy of a table but has a
different partition key and sort key so that you can query on these different
keys.

There're two types of a secondary index in DynamoDB:

- **Global secondary index**: is a complete copy of a table, has its own
  partition key and (optionally) a sort key. A partition key in a global
  secondary index doesn't have to be unique. Global secondary index only
  supports eventually consistent read.

- **Local secondary index**: is a local copy of a partition sorted by another
  key. A local secondary index shares the same partition key as the base table
  but has a different sort key. Local secondary index supports both strongly and
  eventually consistent read.

After creating an index, you do all read operations on it as if you do on the
base table.

Creating a secondary index will cost you more for data storage and write
operations. DynamoDB automatically updates the indexes when you update the base
table and it will charge for all these updates as typical write operations.

## 3 types of write

In DynamoDB, there are 3 types of a write operation:

- `PutItem`, `UpdateItem`, and `DeleteItem`: create, update and delete a single
  item by specifying its primary key.

- `BatchWriteItems`: send a request that groups up to 25 `PutItem` and
  `DeleteItem` requests together. Each request is executed separately and in
  parallel. It is possible that some writes succeed whereas others fail.

- `TransactWriteItems`: all-or-nothing `BatchWriteItems`. All operations must
  either succeed or fail together. This costs twice as much as
  `BatchWriteItems`.

---

# Advice for best utilization

### There're at most 3 related models

Related models mean that these models have a direct relationship to each other.
For example, a post belongs to a user, a post has multiple comments, a user can
comment on multiple posts.

When your app has more than 3 related models, it's highly a chance that SQL is a
better choice because you have out-of-the-box extremely complex query features
in SQL. Modeling relationships in SQL is much simpler. On the contrary, trying
to model relationships in NoSQL is like trying to workaround its disadvantages.

### Can I break my app into smaller apps?

DynamoDB is best for microservices when your app is a combination of multiple
smaller apps.

Let's take the posts-comments-users example, can you break it into smaller apps?
The answer is yes, you can make it 3 smaller apps:

- _User directory app_: stores user profiles, credentials, etc, and
  authenticates users.

- _Blogging app_: stores and renders posts.

- _Commenting app_: stores and shows comments.

DynamoDB is the perfect database for these smaller apps because they have very
simple and discrete data.

**Pro-tip #1**: There's a high possibility that there're external services
implemented for one of your smaller apps, e.g. Firebase for authentication,
Disqus for commenting.

**Pro-tip #2**: Because of this, DynamoDB is a great choice if you want to build
micro-SaaS, which is on-trend in the current market 🤯.

### 1 write = 40 reads

Use this to decide whether you should create an index, duplicate, or cache some
values to optimize for reads.

When you create an index, duplicate, or cache a value, you need at least one
more write which costs as much as 40 eventually consistent reads based on the
DynamoDB pricing model.

So, if a write operation that can reduce more than 40 reads, it's worthing
implementing, otherwise, it isn't.

### Avoid `Scan` and `FilterExpression`

`Scan` reads all items every time you call it, which is both costly and
time-consuming. You are usually able to create a secondary index to avoid
scanning. If you can't avoid a scan, you may think about whether you should use
DynamoDB.

DynamoDB has a `FilterExpression` in `Query` and `Scan` for you to filter out
results before returning. However, it isn't a filter condition on query
operations. The filter is applied only after the query is executed, which only
has value in saving network bandwidth.

### Keep less than 5 secondary indexes

If you create more than 5 secondary indexes, it means your application models
and queries are becoming more complex than what DynamoDB may be best for. In
this case, consider migrating to SQL or breaking your apps into smaller ones.

---

# Key takeaways

Before summarizing, hey 👋🏻! Thank you for reading this far and I hope you learn
how DynamoDB should work for you in the future 😉.

- DynamoDB is a NoSQL document database, there's no relationship and schema, all
  operations happen at the document level.

- DynamoDB is fully-managed by AWS. You have a scalable database infrastructure
  from day one with zero ops overhead.

- You can _pay per request_ at the early stage. Later, you can buy _provisioned
  and reserved units_ to save and set predictable cost + performance for your
  app.

- A primary key in DynamoDB is a partition key or a partition key and a sort
  key. DynamoDB uses these keys to logically identify items and physically
  isolate them for better read performance at scale.

- All read operations except for `Scan` operates on a single partition. To query
  on a different attribute, you'll need a secondary index.

- DynamoDB works best when you're searching for simplicity and scalability. If
  your application has more than 3 related models or 5 secondary indexes,
  consider breaking it into smaller apps or migrating to a SQL database.
